The JEntigrator is the single-user, local, file-based,  NoSQL data management application implemented as a java program. There are no schemas, tables and unions in the JEntigrator. Instead it uses an unified data structure called 'entity' that represents all types of data independent of their nature. Physically an entity is an XML file within the database directory, logically it is a collection of more elementary components – elements and cores. Each entity has a unique key assigned to it and can have a home directory to keep associated  with this entity files. An entity is concepted as an evolving free composition of 'facets'. A facet is defined as a portion of data within an entity and associated with it code within the application. The end user add/remove facets to/from an entity directly through the application GUI in order to adapt the entity to his/her business logic. The JEntigrator supports also container-component relations between entities that can be established from the GUI too. The global properties index speeds up search on entities.

The advantage of such architecture is that the end user can change a data object structure or build hierarchical complexes of data objects without involving of code developers or database designers. Neigter the apllication nor the database system need to be modified. This may dramatically reduce expenses and time delay by data modification. Entities are completely portable between databases through copy-paste procedures.

The JEntigrator is an extensible application that has very few embedded general-purpose facets and can (and must) be adapted to extend the pool of database facets with facets oriented to the user's business area. An entity of the 'extension' type contains desriptors of additional facets and the library that contains the code of these facets. It's enough to import such entity into the database to make these facets available to the end user. The Community extension project contains the code and the data to build the 'Community' extension that handles entities of the 'contact' type. More information about the application can be found in documents quickstart.pdf and whitepaper.pdf

